# Relations Among Rebels

Relations among rebel groups remains one of the most underexplored aspects of civil war. The vast majority of existing studies focus on conflict between non-state actors. A few studies have, however, examined conflict between rebel groups. In the most comprehensive study to date, @Fjelde2012 suggest that rebels fight each other for control over resources such drug supplies or valuable terrain. Greater resource endowments should lead to better postwar bargains with the government in the long run, and greater ability to sustain a rebellion in the short run. The authors find that this logic is most likely to prevail in the presence of natural resources, territories that are not controlled by the government, militarily weak governments, and significant power asymmetries among rebels. @Atlas1999 and @Zeigler2016 find that this dynamic can also arise in the aftermath of conflicts, as the main fighting in renewed civil wars is often between previously allied rebel groups.

Another strand of literature examines the emergence of conflict within previously coherent movements. @Bakke2012a conceptualize the fragmentation of rebels movements as varying in terms of the raw number of organizations, the degree of institutionalization unifying the organizations, and the distribution of power among them. They expect a greater general likelihood of infighting in more fragmented movements, particularly those with large numbers of groups and low degrees of institutionalization. @Asal2012 find evidence that largely supports this claim, showing that ethnopolitical movements with factionalized leadership structures are most likely to experience splits. Similarly, @Cunningham2012a find that infighting is most likely in self-determination movements with large numbers of factions, and that the emergence of new factions is especially likely to trigger violence. @Staniland2014 similarly emphasizes pre-existing social structure, arguing that the probability of an insurgent group splintering is shaped by the strength of social ties in the organization from which it emerged. Others see infighting as contingent on the conflict process. @Christia2012 finds that rebel groups and coalitions tend to fragment when battlefield losses exacerbate divisions between faction leaders, while @McLauchlin2012 find that repression can deepen rifts within movements that are already divided, but cohesive movements may become further solidified by repression.

There is also a substantial literature on intra-ethnic violence. @Lilja2011 find that that Tamil rebels used violence against co-ethnic civilians to control populations and the resources they hold, and against coethnic armed groups to establish dominance within the ethnic group. @Staniland2012d finds that these patterns intra-ethnic violence tend to be self-reinforcing, as violence within ethnic insurgencies is the primary cause of the defection of some subsets of ethnic groups to the opposing side in the conflict. [@Warren2015] seek to explain which ethnic groups are likely to experience such fragmentation, finding a curvilinear relationship between the size of an ethnic group and its probably of experiencing infighting. Small ethnic groups have the ability to police themselves, limiting violence, and intra-ethnic violence in large groups is likely to be met with government intervention. Thus, only moderate-sized groups tend to experience internal violence.

Finally, a few studies consider the formation of alliances among various types of militant organizations. @Asal2008 and @Horowitz2013 conduct network analyses of alliance formation among terrorist groups, arguing that such arrangement are used to aggregate capabilities and share tactics. @Bapat2012 model the logic of alliance formation among rebel groups. They assume that alliances carry two significant costs: the dilution of each constituent group's agenda, and the risk of having one's private information sold to the government by an ally. Consistent with this theory, they find alliances to be most common when an outside state can enforce agreements, and when all rebel groups involved are strong enough to avoid the temptation of defecting to the government side @Christia2012 similarly emphasizes capability, arguing that neorealist balancing theory from international relations explains alignments in civil wars. When one coalition - a group of rebels or government-aligned forces - becomes too powerful, other groups will band together to prevent their own destruction. But similar @Bapat2012, @Christia2012 argues that this mechanism is constrained by a desire to maximize one's share of the post-war spoils. Thus, rebels realign frequently, seeking to form minimum winning coalitions. While shared identity appears on the surface to be an important determinant of rebel alignments, Christia views these narratives as post-hoc justifications aimed at legitimizing decisions that are really driven mostly by power. Some important aspects of alliance formation are beyond the scope of the existing studies, however. Namely, while relative power considerations can potentially account for why rebel groups form alliances, and when they will alter their ties, it does not explain why groups choose a particular partner when multiple options are available. Christia suggests that these decisions are shaped by personal relationships between rebel elites, but does not give this question extended consideration in her empirical analysis. @Horowitz2013 find that militants prefer to ally with powerful groups, but their focus is largely on transnational networks of terrorists and insurgents, rather than alliance formation within a particular conflict. I seek to resolve this gap by explaining not only whether, but also with whom rebel groups will choose to form alliances.