# Conclusion

I have argued that contrary to some theoretical treatments, rebel groups do care about political aims. This fact should lead alliance ties to be most common among groups sharing similar goals. Indeed, I find that in the Syrian Civil War, shared political goals are the single most important determinant of alliance partners. I do not find support for the notion that more powerful groups should be more likely to form alliances. While I do not find evidence of religious homophily, that may be an artifact of the limited diversity of Syrian rebels. Finally, I find a null relationship between shared territorial ambitions and alliances, where I expected a negative relationship.

The finding on the importance of political goals contrasts with multiple existing theories of rebellion. The importance of political goals contrasts with the greed model of civil war, which views rebellion as being primarily aimed at procuring private material benefits for members. It also calls into question purely power-based accounts [@Christia2012], which expect rebels to be concerned with little else but winning. In addition, these results can help us to predict the dynamics of civil conflicts. If we observe a conflict with many rebel factions, but these groups share similar goals, we might expect the movement to aggregate over time. If these groups have disparate interests, however, there is a strong possibility that the conflict will remain highly fragmented. Given the severity associated with more complex conflicts, the ability to make predictions of this sort is highly valuable.

Further research in this area is needed. My hypothesized effects may simply be conditional on factors that I have yet to account for. For example, access to material support from an outside actor should reduce competition over civilian support bases or territory. In addition, this work should be replicated in other cases. As one of the most complex civil wars on record, it is possible that the dynamics in Syria do not apply in other conflicts. Finally, future work should move beyond explaining the formation of networks and explore the effects of network structure on rebel behavior. For instance, are more densely networked rebel coalitions more resilient to anti-insurgent campaigns? Do certain tactics diffuse across rebel networks?
