New possibility:

1. Analysis of attributes of groups that do and do not experience joining

2. Temporal dimension - is there anything that predicts when these groups will join? A certain level of success against the govt by first group (or lack thereof)? Violence against civilians?

3. Spatial dimension - where do they go? To the resources? To ethnic areas? Away from existing groups, or to fight them?

4. ICEWS interactions between groups. Are there discrete events that reveal Rebel ideology? Could do discontinuity or time series.

5. Possibly code a variable of how clearly defined each group's political goals are

6. Are joiners more likely to be included in peace processes?

7. Do protest episodes predict joining?

8 . Pre-war characteristics - are some rebellions more popular than others? Are there cases where rebellion occurs but society as a whole contains few dissidents? Pre-war democracy, human rights, economic performance, protest activity might be useful here.

9. Are resource-endowed groups less ideological

10. Resource curse for rebels. Are rebel groups smaller when they have resources?

11. Logic of joining vs. initiating

12.  What kinds of groups will have ability to mobilize during a war?

13. Use MAROB data for potential joiners? Or ICEWS if there are groups that transition to violence?

14. Extensions: how do joiners contribute to the conflict? Do they fight lots of battles/add to intensity? Undermine state capacity? Participate in peace process?

15. Do resources result in smaller group sizes? How do groups like RUF overcome this effect? Organizational resources? Floor on the effect - need to be big enough to keep control. Maybe a U-shaped effect? Groups with huge amounts of resources like RUF avoid this problem. At the extreme end resources might overcome other divisions.

16. Dissident network varies on ideological preferences, and on propensity for violence - initiators vs. joiners.

17. Does the presence of a resource-based group create motive or opportunity? Or both?
